docs(security): add threat model and Security documentation section (#28069)
PX4/PX4-Autopilot: THREAT_MODEL.md

# PX4 Threat Model

> This document states what PX4 defends against, what it does not, and how an

Reviewer: Please tell Claude or your editor not to create arbitrary line breaks in markdown.

Reviewer: Though, note I don't particularly care for non-docs.

incoming security report is judged. It is normative: where it and a triage
opinion disagree, this document wins. It describes `main`; code references are

> symbols, not line numbers, and were verified at `09ce800969b`.

Reviewer 2: at what? If a link relates to a version it has the hash, otherwise it doesn't - I think that's self explanatory.

A bug that lets an attacker cross one of the boundaries described here is a
security bug. A bug that becomes reachable only after another boundary was
already crossed is a weakness, not a vulnerability. PX4 hardens against
weaknesses, but a weakness alone is not a security bug.

## What PX4 protects

PX4's asset is **control authority over a physical vehicle**: who or what
decides where it flies and whether it stops flying. Confidentiality, logs, and
parameters matter only as paths to that authority. The worst outcome is not
disclosure of data; it is an attacker flying, crashing, or disabling an
aircraft. PX4 is a safety system, so a single security failure can become a
physical hazard, and the threat model is written in those terms.

PX4 cannot promise a vehicle will not crash. It cannot promise a sensor is
telling the truth about the physical world. It does not encrypt telemetry.
Where the text below says "guarantee," it means a property PX4's own code
enforces, not an assurance about the outcome of a flight.

## What PX4 assumes

Like any system, PX4 trusts the layer beneath it. It assumes:

- **Sensors report within specification.** PX4 cannot distinguish a real

>   rangefinder return, GPS fix, or gyro reading from a spoofed one. Defending

Reviewer 2: PX4 will try to detect a spoofed GPS, best-effort though.

Reviewer: Agree. Suggest we use "reliably" as a weasel word: https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/pull/28069/changes#r3670178035

> - **Sensors report within specification.** PX4 cannot distinguish a real
>   rangefinder return, GPS fix, or gyro reading from a spoofed one. Defending
>   the physics is outside firmware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sensors report within specification.** PX4 cannot reliably distinguish a real rangefinder return, GPS fix, or gyro reading from a spoofed one. Defending against physical-layer attacks is out of scope.
```

- **Peripherals are the ones the operator installed.** No bus (UART, I2C, SPI,
  CAN, SMBus) is authenticated. A device on a bus is trusted as whatever driver
  the operator enabled for it.
- **The link is the integrator's to secure.** MAVLink is an open protocol.
  Reaching a MAVLink link and commanding the vehicle is the design, not a
  defect. Link security (radio choice, RF range, network segmentation, a VPN)
  lives below PX4. Message signing is the mechanism PX4 ships for integrators
  who need to close that boundary.

> - **The SD card is code.** Boot scripts, the signing key, some boards'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **The SD card is code.** Boot scripts, the MAVLink signing key, some boards'
```

> - **The SD card is code.** Boot scripts, the signing key, some boards'
>   parameter stores, and staged peripheral firmware all live on it. Physical
>   control of the card is trusted.

Reviewer: All of this is "jargony". However it is also understandable so I don't know how much effort you want to put into tidying it. For example, I would do this as

```suggestion
- **Physical access to the SD card grants control over the vehicle.** Boot scripts, the signing key, some boards' parameter stores, and staged peripheral firmware all live on it. Pulling the card and changing what's on it is administrative access, not an attack.
```

- **The companion computer is inside the boundary.** uXRCE-DDS and Zenoh
  publishers get direct uORB access with no external-origin tag
  (`from_external` is set in `mavlink_receiver` and nowhere in
  `uxrce_dds_client` or `zenoh`). A companion that can reach those transports is
  the operator.
- **The onboard shell and the wired bootloader are administrative.** A peer that

>   can open the NSH shell or reflash over USB is trusted as an administrator.

Reviewer 3: NuttX supports setting an nsh password. Do we mention that?

Reviewer 2: Oh, I did not know that!

These assumptions are the boundary. A report that an attacker who already holds
one of them can then do harm is describing the assumption, not breaking it.

## What PX4 guarantees, by configuration

PX4 does not have one guarantee set. It has a configuration, and the guarantees
are a function of where the deployment sits on the ladder below. A report is
judged against the tier the reported system is actually in.

### Tier 0 — Open (no signing key, shipped default)

No authentication on any control interface. A peer within reach of any
configured link holds the authority of the operator: arm, disarm, mode change,
mission and geofence upload, `PARAM_SET`, `SERIAL_CONTROL` shell, MAVLink FTP,
flight termination. This is the documented default. At Tier 0, PX4 guarantees
exactly two things:

1. **Parser memory safety.** Malformed input on any link or bus does not

>    corrupt memory or execute code. This is the class PX4 ships fixes for

Reviewer 3: Inputs that trigger busy loops is a separate class and can IMO also be on the list here.

Another class is race conditions: inputs might be well-formed but still trigger corruptions based on timing and ordering.

Reviewer: I kind of see all of these kinds of things as "just bugs" that happen to have follow on security implications.

   (crsf_rc, tattu_can, lightware, `MavlinkLogHandler`).
2. **A complete capability list.** The set of effects a link peer can reach is
   exactly the set published in the [security hardening
   guide](docs/en/mavlink/security_hardening.md). A reachable effect that is not
   on that list is a bug.

Everything else at Tier 0 is published capability, not a defense.

### Tier 1 — Authenticated (signing key provisioned, v1.17+)

With a key on the SD card, PX4 acts on no inbound MAVLink message other than the
unsigned allowlist (`HEARTBEAT`, `RADIO_STATUS`, `ADSB_VEHICLE`, `COLLISION`)
unless the frame carries a valid signature. Operator and attacker become

> distinct principals, and three properties become real:

Reviewer: I'm not really sure what the text "Operator and attacker become distinct principals, and three properties become real:" means. I'd drop it  and the bullet points if you don't specifically need it, or link to message signing. 

If you keep it then of the following points "Failsafes react to genuine conditions, not forged ones." is unclear - mostly because most failsafes are separate to anything MAVLink does.

- The operator can take back control; an unauthenticated peer cannot take it.
- Failsafes react to genuine conditions, not forged ones.
- Irreversible actions (terminate, disarm, signing changes) require
  authentication, and signing changes are refused while armed.

Tier 1 has named limits: verification runs in the pinned MAVLink submodule;
signing fails **open** if the key cannot be read at startup; the allowlist above
is always accepted and includes an actuating message (`ADSB_VEHICLE`); and
signing is authentication, not encryption. Telemetry is still plaintext.

### Tier 2 — Authenticated and offboard-isolated

Tier 1 only holds if the adversary cannot reach the uXRCE-DDS or Zenoh
transport. Those publishers drive `/fmu/in/actuator_motors`,
`/fmu/in/actuator_servos`, and `/fmu/in/vehicle_command` with no external-origin
check, so a companion-LAN peer bypasses signing entirely. **Signing on a vehicle
whose offboard transport is reachable buys nothing.** Isolating that transport

> is a precondition of Tier 1 being real, not an optional extra.

Reviewer: The effective prefix to this whole section is " A report is judged against the tier the reported system is actually in."

I don't know what any of this section means, in particular given that prefix. Suggest you rewrite this as "a system is authenticated and offboard isolated if ...". Ditto for all the rest.

### Tier 3 — Verified boot and locked configuration

Secure boot with an integrator-provided key, a read-only parameter set, and
wired reflash disabled. Physical and wired access partially enter scope here.
No in-tree board reaches this tier without integrator work, and the one board
with secure-boot defaults ships a **publicly committed test key** that must be

> replaced.

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit too concrete to be true.

> Each tier names what is missing to climb to the next. The gaps are the roadmap.

Reviewer: Don't know what you are trying to convey here.

## What does not constitute a security bug

> Concrete classes, pre-decided so a report is matched to a rule instead of an

Reviewer: You're saying here is a set of concrete rules that can be used to refute specific security bug reports?

argument. These carve out of the guarantees above.

- **Using an unauthenticated link as designed.** Commanding the vehicle over an
  unsigned MAVLink link is the documented default (see Tier 0). Securing the
  link is the integrator's job. This covers the recurring reports:
  `SERIAL_CONTROL` shell access, MAVLink FTP file operations, `PARAM_SET` of
  safety parameters, mission and geofence overwrite, remote arm/disarm, and
  flight termination, when the only precondition is "reached the link." The
  exceptions below remain in scope even here.
- **Memory corruption is always in scope.** A crafted frame that corrupts
  memory or executes code beyond the protocol's semantics is a bug on any link,
  signed or not. Openness of the link never excuses it.
- **A capability outside the published set is in scope.** A reachable effect not
  in the capability list is a bug until the list is updated, regardless of tier.
- **A pivot to another bus is in scope.** Using the flight controller to reach a
  bus that was not otherwise reachable (for example `TUNNEL` or

>   `SERIAL_CONTROL` passthrough to an ESC, GPS, or CAN node bootloader) is a bug.

Reviewer 2: Isn't that a feature?

  The link's openness grants the link, not the peripheral behind the controller.
- **Persistence is in scope.** An artifact planted over a link that survives the
  attacker leaving it (a boot script, flashed peripheral firmware, an
  overwritten parameter store) is a persistence primitive, judged on its own,

>   not dismissed as transient link access.

Reviewer: Anything here that is "in scope" should be a separate list.
